September 1, 2025 can be a very negative day for Bajaj Allianz and Care Health
Insurance policy holders.
AAPI has
sent a circular to all the hospitals in North India
that if the policy holders of these two companies
come for treatment, they will
not get cashless treatment.  That means if you
have a Bajaj and Care policy, you will have to
pay advance money and then
take reimbursement claim from the health insurance company.
And the most important thing is that this is
not a decision of any small hospital.
AAPI has 15,200 hospitals registered, including
major hospitals like Max and Medanta.
So if you are
from Delhi, NCR, Uttar Pradesh, Haryana, Punjab, Himachal, Chandigarh, Uttarakhand
then this news directly impacts you.
So in today's video we will understand
who is this AAPI who has imposed this ban
and why so many hospitals are listening to this association, this
organization, what
happened between the hospitals and the insurance companies, what kind of dispute took place
which we policy holders do not
know about and the situation has come to this point, we will also know what has been the
response of K and Bajaj Aliens after this news and as
a policy
holder, we will also understand
how we should react to this news, how we should respond to this decision.
So if
you have a health insurance policy
and want clarity on
why this problem occurred to you?
What may come before you in the future, today's
video is going to give you complete clarity.
Let's quickly start this video.  First of all, let us
know who is AAPI?
Its full form is Association of Health Care
Providers India.  It is a non-profit
organization registered as an NGO with
more than 15,000
hospitals registered under it.  That means they are
its members.  Now this association i.e.
AAPI has two major works which they
describe as their objectives.  First of all,
patients should be able to get treatment safely and
affordably.  But
their second mission is the most important.
They work for health care reforms.  That
means we can improve the health care industry.  They
can develop infrastructure
and if any tax or regulation is imposed
on the health care industry, then they
represent the entire industry.
They have representatives and if there is
any dispute with health insurance companies,
they represent the entire healthcare industry and hospitals on such issues also.  Let's put forward
our point on their behalf.
Now if you understand it in simple language then
AAPI can also be called the union or association of hospitals.
Now the question arises,
how is this AAPI so powerful?
Because its network of member hospitals is
spread across India.  If you
talk about North India only, then
600 hospitals in Delhi NCR,
1200 hospitals in Uttar Pradesh,
900 hospitals in a small state like Haryana are its
members.  Apart from this,
many hospitals are also registered in Chandigarh, Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh.
And once
this association says that it will
not give cashless claims, then its impact is on a very large
level and the matter becomes serious.  The
next question that comes to mind is that
HPI is very powerful.  It can ban it
but why only Bajaj Allians and Care Health
Insurance?  Other companies are also
working.  Why was this ban not imposed on him
?  So, HPI members have
reported a total of four complaints due to which this
ban has been imposed.  The first reason is
not revising the rates.  Hospitals say
that the medical cost has increased significantly.
But Bajaj Aliance did
not revise the reimbursement rates.  That means there was no increase in the
money they receive for every treatment.
Rather,
pressure was put on them that they would have to get
this treatment done at cheap rates only.  Whereas the
old contracts where these
rates were fixed had already
expired.  The second reason given was
unilateral deductions.  Now the tie up, the agreement
between the health insurance company and the hospital, is
butteral.   That
means both parties agree on this.  She
agrees.  But the hospitals said
that when it comes to paying the claim amount, the
company makes unilateral deductions.  That means she
deducts money from it without telling, without discussing, without asking.  The third reason
given was delay in payments.  Now the customer
took the treatment and went home.  The company takes a lot of time in paying the hospital's
outstanding amount, which it has
already approved.
And the fourth reason given was that the
company is causing a lot of delay in approvals.   That
means, when a patient is admitted to the hospital, the
company is taking a lot of time in getting the pre-authorization approval or when the patient is discharged at the time of discharge, the discharge approval is coming.
Due to which
both the problems and costs of hospitals increase.
Due to these four reasons, AAPI has
announced that
our member
hospitals will not provide cashless claims to policy holders having Bajaj Allianz policies.  And
if Care Health
Insurance continues to operate in the same manner, to whom the
notice has been sent on August 22, then from September 1,
we will not provide cashless treatment to their policies also.
Now due to these four reasons
you cannot understand what the actual problem
is and you do not understand how the hospital
and the insurance company
work together.  We will understand this through an example.
Suppose this is a health
insurance company named ABC
Company.  It launches its latest health
insurance plan, in which, let's say,
10,000 policies are sold in total.  There are
four members in a family.  There
are 10,000 policies.  Total members covered R
40,000.  Now this company has sold the policy and
also taken the premium.  Now if any claim comes then
they have to be given treatment and it is
necessary to give it cashless.  IRDA has said that
customers also need it.  So now she approaches
hospitals.  She tells the hospitals to
give her the complete price chart of their treatment cost.  Just like a
restaurant has a menu that tells you
how much you charge for which treatment.   The
hospital gives its pricing to the company.
Now the company says we have these
40,000 members who can get treatment in your hospital.
Whenever they are needed.
So you should not discount this price a little.  The
hospital thinks that the
hassle of whether the patient comes or not will end.
If a cashless tie-up is done
then he gives discount on the rates.  Now the
company says that even this discount is not enough.
I am giving you these prices in writing.
You will have to get the treatment done at these prices.  The
hospital thinks, okay, we will
earn on volume, not margin.
Brother, you won't be able to save much on every patient.
But if there are more patients, we will
maintain our profit and margin.  When
both parties agree on these rates and other
conditions,
an MoU is signed between them.
MOU means Memorandum of Understanding
in which the terms and
conditions, pricing and all the details of this entire transaction are
written in detail.  So far everything is fine.
But when this agreement completes one year or
two years,
some expenses of the hospitals start increasing.  Like
they have imported some new machines.  Have
purchased new devices or equipment.
New and better doctors have been hired.  The
salaries of the existing staff have also been
increased.  There
is maintenance cost of the hospital.  Many expenses increase every year.
So after two or three years of the agreement,
those rates are no longer sufficient and
pressure starts building on the hospital's margins i.e. profits.
And then the hospital asks the companies to
revise their rates.  But upon
hearing this, the insurance company
directly thinks that if the hospital
rates are increased then the claim cost will increase.  If
claim costs increase, there will be
pressure on our margins.  If there is pressure on margins,
we will have to increase the premiums of the policies
and if the premiums of the policies
become expensive, then the customer may get angry
or may even port the policy and
ultimately there will be a loss of business.  So they do
not revise these rates so easily.   Let's
stretch it.  They start giving late payments.
Some money starts getting deducted from every claim.
And one by one,
hospitals start having problems with these companies.
And when many such
hospitals come together, they have a
common problem that their rates are
not being revised.  Then powerful associations like HPI
come forward and suddenly
declare that the
hospitals in this region will not give cashless claims to these companies.
Now friends, this is
just one aspect of the story.  It is not that hospitals are also clean.
See this article from July 2025 in which the government and
IRDA themselves admitted that hospitals
overcharge.  This means that
more money is charged
from health insurance for one treatment and the result of this is that the
inflation rate of health insurance premium is
13%.  Whereas
its global average is only 10%.  Although it is
very difficult to solve this problem,
efforts are on and
for this a centralized claim platform was
created named NHCX National
Health Claims Exchange, in which
what transactions are taking place between the hospital, insurance company, patient,
how many claims have been approved, how many deductions have been made,
everything can be seen transparently,
but the problem is that till now NHCX
was looked after and regulated by the Health Ministry,
IRDA had definitely helped in making it.
But recently it has been
proposed that NHDC will be
regulated by the Finance Ministry and IRDA
so that this ecosystem can be controlled in a better way.
And along with this, there
is full preparation to regulate the billing of hospitals.  Now after researching this entire problem
and incident, a
fundamental problem emerges that the
profit of hospitals is linked to higher billing.
Insurance companies' profits are driven
by lower claim costs.  That means the
direction of profit of both is different.  When the
hospital makes a profit, i.e. there is more
billing, the insurance company will incur a
loss.  When insurance companies
benefit, i.e., the claim cost will decrease, then the
billing of hospitals will decrease.
Hospitals will suffer losses.  Therefore, this is
not just a problem of Bajaj and Care Health Insurance.  This can happen with any company
and in any part of the country.
Like recently Ahmedabad Hospital
Association had also taken a similar decision.
Where the contracts of the companies will expire
or will not be revised.  This same
problem will arise.  Now has there been
any response from Bajaj Ali on this HPI ban announcement
?  Absolutely.  Bajaj Ali's
Health Administration Head Mr. Bhaskar
Nehru says that we are
surprised and shocked to hear this ban announcement.
Providing the best hospitalization experience to our policy holders has
always been our goal, target and aim.  As far as
rates are concerned, we constantly talk to the hospital.  We
provide them with updated rates
and apart from that, if
they have any opinion or input to make the claim experience smooth,
we keep working on that too timely.  And if there are
any dues of the hospital, that is, if any money is
still to be paid, then we
work on that too proactively.
We give them that money before the deadline.   That
means, if we believe the company, there is
no such problem from their side.  Now
what decision does the company take in this matter?  Only
time
will tell what turn it takes.  The company will have to take some serious and big decisions before September 1.
But
what is the solution to such problems,
what can we do or what
should the government do so that these problems do not arise in the future?  For this, I think these four things are
necessary.  The first is to
regulate and standardize hospital billing.  This
means that there should be a fixed price for every treatment
and billing
needs to be regulated so that no hospital can
charge arbitrary prices and
such problems do not arise in the future.  The second
advantage of this will be that health insurance
companies will get a clear estimate.
They will get a prediction of
how much their claims are likely to cost.
And such arguments will not come up
whether the hospital has overcharged
or not.  Because who
will decide whether the price is high or low.  And
because of these small disputes, such
incidents happen.  My
third suggestion is that the contracts of Timely Hospitals regarding the
price
they should get also
need to be revised.  If you look, any hospital has
improved its facilities.  Good
doctors have been brought.  Good equipment is
kept there and overall inflation also
increases every year.  So, it is very important to review the rates on the basis of the same calculation and
revise them timely.
Because if good
hospitals do not survive then
this entire ecosystem will be disturbed.  And
my fourth advice is that to achieve these three goals, to
implement all the three steps, the government,
hospitals, health insurance companies and
regulators will have to work in one direction.
And that is for the betterment of
policy holders.  This means that policy holders should
get good treatment, hospitals should have reasonable billing
and the premium should also be reasonable.
If these four entities
work together in this direction, then perhaps
achieving these goals will not be so difficult.
Now friends, the last and most
important question comes that as a policy holder,
how should we react to this ban?
So, do we need to be afraid?  No.
Because such bans are not sustainable.
This is a tactic to
put pressure on health insurance companies to
revise their rates.  So either
IRDA will have to intervene in this or the
health insurance companies will have to
revise and increase their agreed prices.
Because if this was a
matter of one or two hospitals, then health
insurance companies could ignore it.
But this is a strong association AAPI
in which more than 15,000 hospitals
are registered.  So this time the matter
is serious.  That means as a policy holder your rights,
your coverage, your benefits, your features
are all intact.  We just have to wait a bit to see what the
health insurance companies and
regulators decide on this.  Who do you
think is more at fault in this fight
?  Of hospitals or health
insurance companies?  Please do let me know by commenting.  If you
liked the video, you
can like it and if anyone
needs this information, especially the
policy holders of Care and Bajaj Allians, then
definitely share this video with them.  I am
Harvinder Singh, see you in the next video, till then take
care of yourself,
stay happy and stay healthy.  Jai Hind.